# Identifier patterns #

A key part of the linked data best practices are patterns for creating and maintaining identifiers. As given per the [linked data principles](http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html) resources should be identified with HTTP URIs. We adopt these guidelines and recommend to use HTTP URIs over other types of identifiers in public contracts data. As an exception to this rule we put blank nodes for some of the resources in the examples in this framework. Blank nodes are used to name resources that are unlikely to be reused in other datasets, such as price specifications, as for which it suffices to have only a locally-resolvable identifier.

The proposed framework for publishing public contracts data builds on several converging best practices providing guidance on URI patterns, such as [Designing URI set for the UK public sector](http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/designing-URI-sets-uk-public-sector.pdf) or the chapter on [identifier patterns](http://patterns.dataincubator.org/book/identifier-patterns.html) from the book [Linked Data Patterns](http://patterns.dataincubator.org/book/index.html), that provide advice on construction of URI templates and their maintenance. Among the key reasons for having URI patterns defined is the consistent identification of RDF resouces belonging to the same `rdf:type` coming from a single dataset. The use of standard URI patterns simplifies comparability of data due to the ease with which it is possible to find analogous resources in datasets that adopted a similar URI pattern. Ideally, URIs for analogous resources would differ only in the host name and thus would be easy to get re-hosted.

Reviewing the existing approaches to this topic we came up with a list of practices for URI patterns that apply to public contracts data.

  * _Mint URIs in a domain you control._ You should not invent URIs in a domain that you do not own, since you do not control the way such URIs would be resolved.
  * _Distinguish between information and non-information resources._ The difference between these concepts is that while information resources (e.g., HTML pages, PDF files) can be directly retrieved from the web, non-information resources cannot and must be substituted with their representations. The established convention is to use “id” or “resource” at the start of URIs’ hierarchical part for non-information resources, and either “doc” (in HTML) or “data” (in RDF) for information resources, and to provide an HTTP redirect from URIs of non-information resources to their corresponding representation, i.e. an information resource. Another widely used option is to identify non-information resources without a file format suffix and append appropriate suffix to its representing information resource (e.g., `.ttl` for Turtle serialization, `.html` for an HTML page). Instances of all resource types defined in Public Contracts Ontology are non-information resources, however the ontology proposes to link some information resources (e.g., via `pc:attachment` property).
  * _Use hierarchical URI patterns._ The perception of “nesting” in URIs is achieved with the slash (“/”) character following the hierarchical design of file paths. Use this pattern to narrow the context in which an identifier of an entity is sufficiently unique. For instance, this may well apply to geographical resources the names of which are not unique in the global scope, however nesting their names in namespaces constituted by the names of their parent geographical features might disambiguate them (e.g., nesting the name of a city within its country’s name). No trailing slashes at the end of URIs should be used.
  * _Create a URI pattern for each distinct `rdf:type`._ Put the `rdfs:label` of each resource type into its URI pattern. To comply with the limitations of URIs, transform the label to a “slug”, which usually means to lowercase all characters, strip all special characters, and replace whitespace with dashes. The procedure to make a URI slug should be deterministic and well-defined in order to be reproducible.
  * _Put established identifiers, such as company number or tax IDs, in your URI patterns._ Preserve the original identification system (e.g., alphanumerical codes) in RDF data, so that crosswalks from legacy data sources are possible. The use of shared keys makes interlinking easier. For instance, this can be done with properties such as `dcterms:identifier`.
  * _If an existing identifier cannot be treated as globally unique, use a combination of values describing the resource_, which is sufficiently unique to serve as an identifier (e.g., using an ID and a timestamp from the moment when the resource was created).
  * _If it is not possible to use meaningful, human readable identifiers, due to them being prone to collision, use neutral, semantics-free IDs_, such as the [Universally Unique Identifiers](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122.html) (UUIDs).
  * _URIs are as persistent as is the institution maintaining them._ Make an effort to keep the URIs you create working or use a service redirecting to current URIs providing a layer of indirection in their resolution, such as http://purl.org.